# Appendix: Resources and Tools

Additional resources and tools are listed by topical module. 

TBD: Question from Karl for Susy: I'd like to better understand the
purpose of this appendix and how it relates to the other appendices.
Well, as per our discussion on 2021-10-13, we're maybe going to create
some more topic-specific appendixes, so some of this will get moved to
one of those then.

(TBD: Write introductory paragraphs.  Add a few resources for
networking if possible.

* OECD policy-focused AI Policy Observatory -- https://www.oecd.ai/
* Open Data Handbook from the Open Knowledge Foundation --  https://opendatahandbook.org/
* Europe lists some, many useful globally too -- https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/collection/open-source-observatory-osor/about
* Africa regions
* South America
* India

Maybe think about this from a topic viewpoint, e.g., open source, open
data, AI.)

The [Open Source Initiative](https://opensource.org/community) is a good resource and hosts several mailing lists. 

You might also start by connecting with your local university,
especially if there's a computer science or data science program. Open
source and open data are also heavily relied upon in other
disciplines, like physics and public policy programs and business
schools. [DHIS2's early focus on building academic and regional
networks](
https://digitalpublicgoods.net/blog/the-transformative-role-of-academia-digital-public-goods/)
is a great example here. Academic institutions are another source of
useflu national and international networks. You're also likely to find
talent and support at any sort of commercial start-up accelerator or
incubator, which if not physically local might still be accessible and
helpful to you online.

## Resources and Tools: Benefits of Open Source

* The World Bank report [Open Source for Global Public
  Goods](https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/33401)
  (2019) provides an overview of the benefits of open source along
  with sensible operational advice, especially for
  resource-constrained environments, and a few case studies of
  Identification for Development (ID4D)  esp in resource-constrained
  environments. More on It reiterates many of the same points we note
  here, such the benefits of open APIs and a modular architecture.

* [Open Source Software Finds its Sweet Spot in the Public
  Sector](https://www.publicsectorexecutive.com/Public-sector-focus/open-source-software-finds-its-sweet-spot-in-the-public-sector-)

General How-To Guides with Emphasis on Creating and Managing Your Own Open Source or Open Data Project 

* The [Standard for Public Code](https://standard.publiccode.net),
  listed as a DPG itself, "gives public organizations a model for
  building their own open source solutions to enable successful future
  reuse by similar public organizations in other places. It includes
  guidance for policy makers, city administrators, developers and
  vendors."

* [Federal Source Code
  Toolkit](https://github.com/GSA/code-gov-open-source-toolkit): This
  is a government-wide project facilitated by the Code.gov team to
  produce "how to" documentation pertaining to federal source code and
  open source software (OSS). It provides guidance to agencies for
  creating and maintaining federal source code inventories and open
  source repositories.

* RedHat's [Guidebook for open source community management: The Open
  Source Way
  2.0](https://www.redhat.com/en/blog/guidebook-open-source-community-management-open-source-way-20). The
  Mozilla Foundation also created an [Open Leadership Training
  Series](https://mozilla.github.io/open-leadership-training-series/articles/building-communities-of-contributors/)
  that includes some useful tips on building contributor communities.

* Unfortunately, participants in online communities exhibit the same
  destructive behavior we see in the real world, and marginalized,
  vulnerable community members are most frequently targeted. Clear
  community participation guidelines can help fend off some of these
  behaviors, and their *enforcement* builds trust within a
  community. [Mozilla's Community Participation Guideline (CPG)](
  https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/about/governance/policies/participation/)
  is a great model to consider copying for your own open source
  project. Mozilla's CPG is based on existing best practices and a
  good amount of hands-on experience and research into creating more
  inclusive contributor communities. Note that it includes a clear
  structure for reporting problematic community behavior and what to
  expect as part of this process. The DPG OpenMRS has a good [code of
  conduct](
  https://wiki.openmrs.org/display/RES/OpenMRS+Code+of+Conduct) that
  they adapted from the Ubuntu open source project. [Mozilla's 2020
  analysis of its contributor
  communities](https://report.mozilla.community/assets/report/Mozilla-Rebel-Alliance-Report-2020.pdf)
  provides more insight into how to support diversity and inclusion.

* https://producingoss.com/en/index.html

* https://opensource.guide/leadership-and-governance/

* Crowdsourcing data collection -- particularly through volunteers --
  can also require attention to community development and management
  (e.g. [Lacuna Fund's RFP requirements
  here](https://s31207.pcdn.co/wp-content/uploads/sites/11/2020/09/RFP-Language_23-Sept-1.pdf)). 

* The open source and open data project Common Voice [published a
  ['community
  playbook'](https://common-voice.github.io/community-playbook/)to
  foster new, independent communities to form around collecting voice
  data different languages. This guidance helps Mozilla track data
  collection around the globe and ensure high quality while letting
  local efforts grow without much centralized control.

However, don't be put off by the more thorough guides we cite above
and feel encouraging and managing an open source project requires
significant investment in community development and governance. Deep
investment isn't necessary for every project type. For those where it
makes sense, you should approach community development in phases and
'right size' investment to what's needed. For example, the DPG [AI
Agro's machine learning
algorithms](https://github.com/RentadroneCL/AI-Agro) are available on
GitHub, with a simple overview of their project on that makes it clear
what they plan to work on, how to contribute, and how to join the
community discussion on Discourse. If we had to peg this as an
archetype, it's probably most akin to a Speciality Library. They're
open to anyone participating, but they're likely to only attract those
who have the skills and expertise to contribute and don't need to
build for a broader audience. The DPG Primero created a [global
inter-agency governance
structure](https://www.unicef.org/evaluation/media/946/file/Primero.pdf)
only when the platform had matured enough to merit such formalized
oversight.

For those projects that would benefit from a community manager, note
that a community manager's role can be more broadly defined to include
adjacent work like documentation, running trainings, and managing key
partners, as well as typical community management tasks like . For an
example, see a [recent job posting for a community
managaer](https://www.kobotoolbox.org/join-our-team/project-community-engagement-coordinator.html)
from the the team behind the Kobo Toolbox DPG (accessed Sept. 2021).

## Resources and Tools: Community

This [2018 slide presentation of project
archetypes](https://opentechstrategies.com/files/presentations/2018-finos/finos-presentation.html)
is a useful short summary.

Health: https://producingoss.com/en/evaluating-oss-projects.html

Mozilla: https://report.mozilla.community/

Creating your own community

There's a rich set of online materials about how to create and nurture
a thriving open source community. Some of our favorites include:

* The EU's [Guidelines for Sustainable Open Source Communities in the
  Public
  Sector](https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/inline-files/Guidelines%20for%20Sustainable%20OSS%20Communities%20in%20the%20Public%20Sector%20final.pdf)
  (2020). This aligns with the recommendations covered here, from a
  needs and readiness assessment through long term sustainability, but
  it also includes a lits of key considerations to building your own
  open source community.

* The TODO Group's [Starting an Open Source
  Project](https://todogroup.org/guides/starting/) and [Building an
  Inclusive Open Source
  Community](https://todogroup.org/guides/diversity-inclusion/)

* https://opensource.guide/building-community/

* https://www.contributor-covenant.org/

* The OpenSRP project publishes a very readable, straightforward
  [overview of how its governance, contribution process and community
  management work](https://smartregister.org/governance-structure/). 

* [Producing Open Source Software: How to Run a Successful Free
  Software Project](https://producingoss.com/en/index.html)

* Regarding external financing of projects, the [Guidelines for
  Funding Open Source Software
  Development](https://www.archesproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/guidelines_funding_OSS.pdf])
  was written with an audience of public and private foundations in
  mind and will give you a good sense of what many funders are likely
  to look for in a proposal that includes open source software
  development. Many of the points in these guidelines also show up in
  practical recommendations in this paper, but you might still benefit
  from glancing at this as you plan for your DPG.

* Code of conduct - https://wiki.openmrs.org/display/RES/OpenMRS+Code+of+Conduct

## Resources and Tools: Policy

**Integrated Policy Approaches**

The World Bank pubished a background paper [Estonian e-Government
Ecosystem: Foundation, Applications,
Outcomes](https://thedocs.worldbank.org/en/doc/165711456838073531-0050022016/original/WDR16BPEstonianeGovecosystemVassil.pdf)
that's a thorough overview of the integrated factors -- policies,
institutions, technologies and more -- that helped Estonia create a
successful e-government service ecosystem.

**Public Domain**

The Open Source Initiative provides a simple explanation of the
[problems of public domain
software](https://opensource.org/faq#public-domain)

**Security**

We like David Wheeler's much noted [essay on security in open source
versus closed
source](https://dwheeler.com/secure-programs/Secure-Programs-HOWTO/open-source-security.html).
Bruce Schneier, a renouned security expert, has also [written
frequently on the
topic](https://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2020/12/open-source-does-not-equal-secure.html).

The Open Source Security Foundation publishes[free EdX
courses](https://openssf.org/edx-courses) on best practices in
developing secure software and hosts a [related open
community](https://github.com/ossf/wg-best-practices-os-developer). The
paper [Threats, Risks, and Mitigations in the Open Source
Ecosystem](https://github.com/ossf/wg-identifying-security-threats/blob/main/publications/threats-risks-mitigations/v1.1/Threats%2C%20Risks%2C%20and%20Mitigations%20in%20the%20Open%20Source%20Ecosystem%20-%20v1.1.pdf)
has a great overview of how to think about security from the
perspective of an open source ecosystem (here, they use ecosystem to
describe the set of things that comprise a specific open source
project, such as developers, end users, technical architecture, and
package libraries).

Similar to the Principles for Digital Development on Privacy and
Security](https://digitalprinciples.org/principle/address-privacy-security/),
the Open Reference Architecture for Security and Privacy lists its own
set of [key
principles](https://security-and-privacy-reference-architecture.readthedocs.io/en/latest/08-security-principles.html)
along with a list of FOSS security and privacy
applications.(https://security-and-privacy-reference-architecture.readthedocs.io/en/latest/security-sbbs.html)

A few **security questionnaires** we've come across that you might find useful as you evaluate working with vendors include: 

- [This security
  questionnaire](https://www.nj.gov/labor/assets/PDFs/rfq/SoNJ%20Third-Party%20Information%20Security%20Questionnaire%20v1.0.pdf)
  is from the state of New Jersey in the United States. It's extremely
  comprehensive and does reference local and national laws in the
  United States, yet it's still a useful model.

- [Google publishes several security
  questionnaires](https://vsaq-demo.withgoogle.com) that are also
  supported by an adaptable [interactive questionnaire
  application](https://github.com/google/vsaq)

* The United States National Institute for Standards and Techology
  (NIST) publishes a [security testing technical
  guide](https://www.nist.gov/publications/technical-guide-information-security-testing-and-assessment)
  that gives an "overview of key elements of technical security
  testing and examination, with an emphasis on specific technical
  techniques, the benefits and limitations of each, and
  recommendations for their use."

* The [SAFETAG](https://safetag.org) is a security auditing framework
  and evaluation template aimed at advocacy groups that might be more
  'right sized' for capacity limited DPGs.

Lastly, some thoughts on **cultural and security considerations when coding in the open**. 

It's important to think through the cultural shifts required for an
open project to succeed. Regulation, policies and processes can set
the boundaries of an environment and influence behaviour, but the
execution is still up to individual human choice.

Open source co-development often requires new tools and processes, and
that change must be supported by the organization's culture. At its
heart, open source collaboration requires communicating and coding in
the open. This transparency brings the benefits outlined throughout
this document, but it also opens the project -- and its human
participants -- to feeling vulnerable to more criticism and being
called out more easily for mistakes. Recognize that change feels like
a loss to many. It feels like a loss of stability and what they knew
about how to work, and they will need leadership and guidance. Be sure
to keep conversations going in your team about how well organizational
culture supports their needs.

One of the greatest fears of many developers is to jeopardize a
project's security and potentially harm real people. Many might worry
that open source code is itself a security vulnerability. What if a
mistake is made in the open? How can an agency decide what code should
stay proprietary because of security concerns?

The UK government has publicly wrangled with these issues and come up
with useful guidance. It's notable that their stance on how much code
to develop through an open source model has changed from "most" to
"all, with very limited exceptions."  In short, their experience taught
them that open sourcing code was actually a great way to confirm and
enhance security, perhaps even particularly for code related to
managing security. When following and enforcing [strong security
design](https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/cyber-security-design-principles),
such as ensuring configuration files are kept separately from code,
they found that open peer review improves security. 

The UK's guidance [Security Considerations When Coding in the
Open](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/open-source-guidance/security-considerations-when-coding-in-the-open)
is a concise, clear checklist for developers and program managers that
links to other useful resources, such as how to manage software
dependencies and the value of automated style enforcement. These
checklist items include:

* Open the code early
* Don't rely on closed code as your only security measure
* Follow good development practices
* Keep keys and credentials closed
* Assume accidental publications are compromised
* Deal with security vulnerabilities

Their [approach to when code should be kept
closed](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/open-source-guidance/when-code-should-be-open-or-closed)
is similarly straightforward:

* Data and code related to keys and credentials
* Algorithms used to detect fraud
* Unreleased policy should be kept closed.


## Resources and Tools: Adoptability

The [Open Source Maturity
Model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenSource_Maturity_Model) is
another way of evaluating an open source product for adoption. It
covers the same points we review in the paper, but it has more of a
process-oriented approach that also includes scoring and
weighting. More background is in this article by Bernard Golden in
[Technology Innovation Management
Review](https://timreview.ca/article/145), (May 2008).


## Resources and Tools: Procurement

The Digital Impact Alliance's [Procurement Of Digital
Technology](https://procurement-digitalimpactalliance.org/) is a
useful guide for budget planning. [TODO: describe a bit better w/
context] [NEW TODO: To delete b/c it's now incorporated into main text
appropriately]

This [panel discussion about agile development and modular
contracts](https://www.agilegovleaders.org/watch-agl-live-wild-wild-west-managing-agile-contracts-in-government/)
includes public sector employees from the state of California and 18F,
discussing great insights about the challenges and lessons learned in
their revamp of California's Child Welfare digital system.



 
